Exposing MCP resources automatically over synthetic tools (#3302)
langchain4j/langchain4j: docs/docs/tutorials/mcp.md

## Resources

There are two ways how to work with resources. Either the application can call the MCP client's
resource-related methods to access resources programmatically, or there is an option to expose
resources automatically to LLM calls via synthetic tools (one tool to obtain a list of resources

> and one to obtain the contents of a resource) so that Chat Models can consult resources by themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and one to obtain the contents of a resource) so that LLMs can consult resources by themselves.
```

the MCP tool provider will automatically add two synthetic tools to the result of its `provideTools` method,
along the 'regular' tools that are supported by the backing MCP servers. One tool should serve for obtaining
a list of resources and the other for obtaining a particular resource. LangChain4j provides
a default implementation named `DefaultMcpResourcesAsToolsPresenter` that adds these two tools:

**_NOTE:_** The rest of this section describes `DefaultMcpResourcesAsToolsPresenter`. You may plug in your own implementation
that behaves differently.

- `list_resources`: Lists all resources exposed by the backing MCP servers. This tool takes no arguments.
- `get_resource`: Reads the contents of a resource. This tool takes two arguments that together identify a resource:
MCP server name and the URI.

The output of `list_resources` is a JSON array like:

```json
[ {
  "mcpServer" : "alice",
  "uri" : "file:///info",
  "uriTemplate" : null,
  "name" : "basicInfo",
  "description" : "Basic information about Alice",
  "mimeType" : "text/plain"
}, {
  "mcpServer" : "bob",
  "uri" : "file:///info",

>   "uriTemplate" : null,

Reviewer: Would it be possible to not serialize `null` properties in order to save tokens?

Author: I'm not completely sure it wouldn't confuse the LLM, but hopefully not...

But, I'm not that familiar with the Json SPI, I just call `dev.langchain4j.internal.Json.toJson(...)`, is it possible to configure it to leave out nulls? I guess that would need some updates to the SPI and its implementations, right?

Reviewer: You are right, then let's keep it simple

  "name" : "basicInfo",
  "description" : "Basic information about Bob",
  "mimeType" : "text/plain"
} ]
```

Each document in this array represents one resource. Each resource is identified by a combination of `uri` and `mcpServer`, 

> where `mcpServer` is the value of `key` that was assigned to the MCP client during creation (see `DefaultMcpClient.Builder#key`).

Reviewer: I am not sure about this, but in most cases there will probably be a single MCP server configured.
So maybe in this case it makes sense to omit the `mcpServer` argument from the tool?
Benefits:
- LLM will be less likely to hallucinate it and fail, also less tokens consumed
- user does not need to explicitly specify `key`

WDYT?

Author: Without it, how will we handle cases where multiple servers offer resources with the same URI?
Besides, the user does not have to specify this. The key, if unspecified, is auto-generated (https://github.com/langchain4j/langchain4j/blob/1.1.0/langchain4j-mcp/src/main/java/dev/langchain4j/mcp/client/DefaultMcpClient.java#L76) - maybe I could repeat that in the docs to avoid scaring the user that they have to specify it

Author: ~Maybe I could imagine ignoring a wrong key in cases where the URI is enough to identify a resource~

Ah, no, with multiple servers, we would need to contact all of them anyway to find out where the resource is. So, we could ignore it in cases where there is only a single MCP server. 

> I am not sure about this, but in most cases there will probably be a single MCP server configured.

I don't know that much about real-world deployments yet, but I would assume that a lot of apps will use multiple MCP servers

Reviewer: > So, we could ignore it in cases where there is only a single MCP server.

But then what's the point in forcing the LLM to generate the argument that will be ignored anyway?

What I meant is:
When there is a single MCP client configured, get_resource would have just one argument (uri).
When there are multiple MCP clients configured, get_resource would have 2 arguments.

Author: That's a bit of a danger zone because the `McpToolProvider` allows adding and removing MCP clients dynamically, there might be one when `list_resources` is invoked and then more when `get_resource` is invoked. The signature may change within a single conversation...

I don't think requiring the LLM to pass the key is a big problem. And even if it's wrong and we can still retrieve the resource, we will retrieve it... I mean, just for leniency, to allow room for a little hallucination.

Author: Thinking about it again, if we allow dynamically adding and removing clients, maybe using keys should be required, to avoid accidentally contacting a wrong server after the server list changes, which may even be a security problem

Reviewer: > I don't think requiring the LLM to pass the key is a big problem. And even if it's wrong and we can still retrieve the resource, we will retrieve it... I mean, just for leniency, to allow room for a little hallucination.

Yeah, makes sense

Reviewer: > That's a bit of a danger zone because the McpToolProvider allows adding and removing MCP clients dynamically, there might be one when list_resources is invoked and then more when get_resource is invoked. The signature may change within a single conversation...

With the current implementation, this does not seem possible as you make a copy (`Collections.unmodifiableList(mcpClients)`), so there is no risk.

Author: `Collections.unmodifiableList` does not create a copy, only a view that is unmodifiable by the receiver of that object
